okay here is the prime minister let's
listen thanks for joining us
it's five weeks since we set ourselves
the target
of vaccinating almost 15 million of the
most vulnerable people
in the country and the aim was and
is clear to everyone by offering the
prospect of
protection from kovid to everyone 70 and
over
to all frontline nhs and care staff
to older care home residents and staff
and to all those
who are clinically extremely vulnerable
we can do the most
the fastest to reduce the incidence of
death and serious illness
and with less than a week to go until
the target date
of monday the 15th there's no doubt
we have made great strides with
just over 13 million people now
vaccinated
in our united kingdom including one in
four adults in
england over 90 of everyone over 75
and over 90 of eligible residents
of care homes for the elderly but
that still leaves nearly 2 million
people a population roughly
twice the size of birmingham that we
still hope to reach
and there are people across the country
who for one reason
or another haven't yet taken up their
offer so now is the moment to do it
wherever you are you won't be more than
about 10 miles away
from a vaccination center so go online
or get someone
to help you or simply pick up the phone
and call
119 and let me appeal particularly to
the fantastic social care workers that
we
all rely on to look after our relatives
our parents
our grandparents if you haven't received
a letter
please contact your employer and fix it
up
and let me stress that these vaccines
are safe
and effective and it was good to see the
world health organization today
confirm its support for the oxford
astrazeneca vaccine
for using everyone over the age of 18
and obviously
everyone over 65 and also
supporting the 12-week interval between
the two doses indeed
they say the longer interval provides
greater
protection and the reason i make this
appeal
today to for people to come forward in
those groups and get vaccinated
is not so we hit some a numerical
target but to save lives uh prevent
serious illness and so the whole country
can take another step on the
long and hard road back to normality
and as the data comes in i'll be saying
more about that
including setting out the road map over
the next
two weeks i think the people of this
country absolutely understand the
importance
of protecting the most vulnerable first
and that's what we are doing
and if we can keep the pace up and keep
the supplies of
vaccine up we hope to reach everyone in
cohorts one to nine
by the end of april and i want to thank
all those involved
for their heroic efforts the doctors the
nurses military medics
local authorities transport planners
warehouse
operatives delivery drivers countless
volunteers
often working through the night or even
digging out snowed in
vaccination centers like the community
effort at orwoodley
medical center in leeds last saturday so
gps
nurses and their teams could deliver
1 200 doses that day
and i want to thank the millions of
people who have received their
vaccinations and
with cases still high and the
pressure on our nhs still
severe i want finally to thank everyone
all of you who are continuing to follow
the rules and i urge you once again
to stay at home protect the nhs and save
lives
thank you very much i'm not going to ask
patrick to do the slides yes thank you
you can have the first slide please
this shows the number of people testing
positive for uh
covert 19 in the uk from september
through to
today and what you can see is that this
peak that we've had in january is now
coming down
coming down to much lower numbers today
the number was thirteen thousand and
thirteen people
testing positive so these are people
coming through the testing system
and you can see that there is a good
decrease but numbers still remain
high next slide please
a more unbiased way of looking at this
is the ons
survey which takes a sample of people
from across
england and the community and what you
can say he
see here and the the pinkish line is
when restrictions were
introduced the lockdown and you can see
the numbers are coming down and
these are old data because it gets
updated every week
and they look backwards a bit so i'd
expect this to come down further
when we see the next set of data and
come down further again thereafter
so in terms of the number of cases
things are definitely heading in the
right direction
and that is trending also of course in
terms of hospital admissions which are
coming down
as well next slide please
and this shows the reduction in the
number of people in hospital so hospital
admissions have come down and the number
of people in hospital has come down as
well
you can see here the dotted line shows
the number of people that were in
hospital with the first peak so we're
still above the first peak numbers
but it's clearly coming down and i want
to take this opportunity to just say
thank you to everybody because it's
because people have stuck to the
lockdown rules and the
difficult rules that we have to follow
in order to get this to come down
this is reducing uh to in the way that
we see
and also of course a huge thank you to
my friends and colleagues in the nhs for
all the enormous work they've done
to look after this number of people so
hospital
admissions and hospital numbers coming
down and this is also translating into a
reduction in deaths next slide please
and you can see here the seven day
average
shown in the line and then the
individual days which which dot around a
bit depending on reporting
but you can see the seven day average
coming down
again deaths coming down as
hospitalizations come down as well
so all of the numbers are trending in
the right direction
uh coming down quite well because of the
effects of the
of the lockdown and here the deaths are
now below the first peak average and
coming down but they still got a long
way to go
and i expect them to take some weeks to
come right down
final slide please and as the prime
minister has said the vaccination
program
is going very well and over 30 million
people have been
vaccinated thank you thank you very much
patrick let's go to questions from
members of the public kathy from
huddersfield
infection rates of the top two priority
groups in the daily infection figures
if so by how much and if not why not
thank you
i think that's an incredibly important
uh question
kathy um and i as i
as i as i told everybody a few weeks ago
this was one of the key things that we
were going to be
looking at as we make our plans for
the the road map in in in a couple of uh
weeks time and we'll be following the
data very closely but i think i'd really
better go to
uh to patrick for um
an appreciation of what we're actually
seeing so far because at the moment
uh although we're seeing uh reductions
in deaths and we're seeing the
uh control of the virus it seems pretty
hard to me
uh to see actual uh impact of the
uh of the vaccination uh program uh
uh on on those on those numbers
yet but i'm told that uh we wouldn't be
necessarily
be seeing it yet but but patrick over to
you well it take
it takes two or three weeks for the
effect of the first dose of vaccine to
really start kicking in in terms of
immunity a little longer
towards three weeks or possibly longer
in in the oldest groups
and then of course it takes time for
people to catch infections and for that
to show up
so it's not surprising that we're not
getting all of the data through yet
um if you look at israel there's
beginning to see some
data there suggesting um quite a
significant effect
and we will be able to analyze our data
over the next uh
next couple of weeks to start seeing the
effect and i think it's important not to
keep looking
too early because these are complicated
figures to look at but we would expect
to see a reduction
first of all in um severe disease and
and probably in
in the deaths and and also in infection
rates and and that's what we're looking
at
and we'll see data as i say within the
next couple of weeks i hope
thanks very much uh kathy let's james
from huxbridge
with the government expanding the
availability of lateral flow tests to
businesses with more than 50 employees
are there any plans to use similar
schemes to allow for the opening of
weddings and other events with a similar
number of guests
thank you james i'm i'm a massive
enthusiast for the advantages of
of lateral flow testing and
daily testing it's getting ever more
uh sophisticated uh there are tests
that you can do now that uh don't
require
uh that you just require a salivary uh
test they're faster than the ones
which which involves swab up the nose
and uh and so on
uh but these will really come into their
own i think as we
uh as we get the vaccination program uh
really uh
you know going down the cohorts uh and
as we
as we start to uh to be able to
unlock in the way that i hope to to set
out in the next uh
in the next couple of weeks so the the
answer to your to your question
james is we do want uh eventually of
course we want
uh weddings and other such events to uh
to go ahead
as a result of the of the vaccination
the overall program the overall
reduction of disease and lateral flow
testing we think will be of continuing
benefit uh to uh businesses and to
events of all kinds as an additional
safeguard but
patrick perhaps you'd like to comment on
that nothing really to add i mean i
think we need to wait for numbers to
come down before we start thinking about
how to keep things open and obviously
get more vaccinations out and then
natural flow tests clearly have a place
in terms of picking up infections that
otherwise you wouldn't detect
thank you very much and the laura
koonsburg bbc
uh thank you very much prime minister
should members of the public be booking
summer holidays or not
whether at home or abroad because the
transport secretary this morning warned
people against booking anything
at all and sir patrick if i may
how concerned are you about the
potential of the variant that's been
picked up in bristol where there's been
14 cases in that city already and
suggestions it might be
more transmissible than some of the
other variants around
thanks laura well as you know as
everybody knows
it's currently illegal to go on holiday
uh that's the state of play at the
moment
we're looking at the data every day on
monday we'll be able to say a little bit
more about where we are in terms of the
uh the jcvi one to four
group and uh we hope and uh whether
where the data is then
and in the week of the 22nd as i said
we'll be setting out
uh the the roadmap and uh that is uh
the best i can i can give there's
not a an awful uh long delay now between
now and the
and the 22nd uh but i hope uh that will
be able to give some more
clarity uh to people then laura
in in terms of the variance we're seeing
the same variance
or some of the same things in various
popping up all over the world
um and that's what you'd expect there
are some variants the virus likes to
have
because it gives it some sort of
advantage and the advantages
that variations may give include
increased transmissibility
or increased severity and potentially
for some
immune differences which means that the
body recognizes it differently from an
old variant those are the three things
that one worries about
um the common variant that's now in the
uk
that started was first detected in in
kent um
does transmit more and perhaps is more
severe as i've described before
but it doesn't seem to cause enough of
an immune shift to worry about that in
terms of vaccine so the vaccines work
really well against that
so the first message is that you know
for all of the
massive uh of the virus out there it's
getting vaccinated which is important
and making sure that we everybody who's
eligible to get a vaccine goes out and
gets vaccinated
really critical um the bristol variant
has got one of the
changes that the south african uh
variants got as well and again it's one
that the virus likes to try and get so
it's not surprising it's happened and it
will happen elsewhere as well
and in getting that variant it does make
it slightly more likely
to look different to the immune system
so we need to watch out for it we need
to measure it
to keep on top of it and need to keep
testing
the vaccine effects in the in this
situation but the very key thing
the thing that we have to do is get
numbers down the lower you get numbers
the lower the chance of getting more
mutations
thank you uh tom clark itv news oh
it didn't answer the question
thanks very much public health england
has confirmed to us
today that what looked like really
positive data
for of on vaccine efficacy in the real
world in the uk
vaccine rollout are you encouraged by
how well the vaccine
appears to be working in that early data
and so patrick violence if i may
given the great progress of making on
vaccination and encouraging results
are you becoming concerned that the
politicians you advise might be tempted
to uh maybe resist your advice to be
very measured and slow
in how we lift lockdown restrictions
well
thank you very much tom as i think you
may uh may guess
there's no one more tempted to be
encouraged uh by
uh data than the than me but i've got to
be uh honest with you i've looked at the
to the the data i've seen and
scrutinized it with my
layman's eye and so far as i said in
answer to
to kathy from uh from huddersfield uh
you know
yes we're getting the the numbers down
uh but
uh can i see uh results that
i think are directly attributable to the
rollout of the vaccine
uh although i'm sure that that will
happen soon
tom i i can't say that i can see them
yet and that's that's my
uh my honest answer at the moment but uh
so
it's great that public health england
have published some encouraging data but
that's
that's how it seems to me at present but
patrick again yeah i just want to wait a
bit longer
until we see the full data i mean we
need to get data that comes through
that we can really understand analyze
and be sure of what's happening
say encouraging results from israel
coming through the clinical trials are
very clear about the efficacy of these
vaccines so you'd expect all this to
happen i think we should wait and look
at this properly and not try and
second guess as we go along um in in
terms of the
speed of change it's worth remembering
that even with very high vaccine
uptake and it's great to see so many
people have come forward and been
vaccinated
there's still a large number of people
who aren't vaccinated
and there will be a significant number
of people in high-risk groups who aren't
yet vaccinated because
they either haven't had an opportunity
to they can't take it for some other
reason or they haven't come forward
and those people remain at risk and so
it's important
that we go cautiously in opening up in
order to be able to measure the effects
and one of the things that's really
crucial in this is to
get enough information to know the
trajectory we're on
and not jump ahead of it because we're
very high levels
and that can take off very quickly so i
think caution
is important as we go into opening
things up and
measuring is important and data is
what's going to be important
the virus isn't going to be particularly
interested in dates
absolutely and i think what uh what
business is going
up and down the country are going to
want is a cautious and measured
approach that is that is pragmatic and
and uh one that we don't have to
uh retreat from or or reverse andy bells
channel 5 news no thank you um
prime minister the travel organization
iata says they've been talking to the
government about developing a travel
app can you confirm if the government's
been talking to them about developing
this and
is it not quite a good idea to develop
an app whereby people's
vaccination status their test status
could be recorded
and could that be a way to unlock travel
uh
in the summer um and one question to you
sir patrick the prime minister says he's
a big fan of lateral flow tests
are you absolutely satisfied that those
tests are as good as they need to be
uh to perform the function they're being
asked to do now
sorry uh andy on on uh the
travel app we're looking at all sorts of
things
uh that we may wish to to do in the in
the months
ahead of course that's right to do you'd
expect us to be talking to
uh to travel firms about all kinds of
options but the top priority
now is to drive forward that vaccination
program for everyone to give everyone
that's vulnerable
the highest possible level of protection
and then keep on working
down the age group so we give everybody
in the country the protection
uh that they need or that we can give
with the science available to us and
then
and that's the way we want to to get
back to normality that's our
our priority uh and but when we're in
that
uh different world which i hope will be
as you know obviously as soon as
possible then all kinds of apps and all
kinds of possibilities
will be open to us and the lateral flow
tests um
a really important part of our toolkit
and
[Music]
if you compare natural flow tests to pcr
you'll get more positives with pcr
because pcr is very very sensitive you
can
pick up very low levels of virus which
may not even be infectious it may just
be low levels there so
pcr will always pick up more than
lateral flow
lateral flow tests are good at picking
up people with high viral load who are
most infectious
they will pick up if you use them in
situations where you otherwise wouldn't
pick up anybody of course they're useful
to pick up the people that you would
have missed by definition because you're
not testing
and what they're not is a hundred
percent guarantee that you haven't got
it
and that's important i mean they they
will pick up positives
and that allows you to deal with people
who are positive and also allow people
to isolate
and they will not guarantee that you
haven't got it but they will
reduce substantially the chance and so
they have to be used in the right
circumstances and that's what public
health england have advised and i think
in those circumstances they they're
absolutely the right thing to do
yeah i think i think the key thing about
lateral flow tests is they're going to
be part of the
of the mix and they're really a very
important part of the of the mix but
what they fundamentally
are useful are doing is telling you
whether you're likely to be infectious
uh much more accurately than they can
tell you whether you're actually
uh infected as it were so they do have a
very clear
use case but it's in conjunction with
everything we're doing and the priority
is obviously uh vaccination mikey smith
the mirror
my prime minister a couple of quick ones
for you um
first of all you didn't really answer
laura's question about summer holidays
so i thought i'd let you have another go
um there's a bit of confusion between
your ministers about whether people
should book summer holidays
um you said it fairly recently that
you're optimistic about
it um is your family planning to get
away this summer
and what's your message for members of
the public who are desperate to get away
from all this
um and secondly in july last year
government scientists told you that
what their prediction of the worst case
scenario was for the spread of the virus
in the run-up to winter
newly released documents uh that the
government held back for six months
uh show they also told you that the
worst case
scenario was avoidable if you followed
their advice
they suggested you not rush to reopen
schools and universities that you not
plan to relax
rules over christmas and that you keep
people working from home wherever
possible
and in each of those cases you did not
follow that advice
only to reverse course when it made
things worse
and by november before the new variants
emerged we were in the worst case
scenario that was predicted in july
two weeks ago you stood on that spot and
you told grieving families you'd done
everything you could but don't these
documents suggest that that isn't true
well uh mikey first of all on your your
question about
uh the summer holidays i really repeat
what i said to
to laura i'm afraid it is just uh too
early for people to uh
be certain about what we'll be able to
do
this summer and we hope to be able to
debate to say more in the week of the
22nd as i've said when
more data comes in more more crucial
data about
the rollout of the vaccine program and
how it's working on
on us all mikey so i'm afraid i
understand why people want to make plans
now but we're just going to have to be a
little bit uh a bit more
a bit more patient and on your your
second point well
there's been scientific advice of all
kinds uh throughout the
uh the pandemic and uh what i can
tell you is that as soon as we became
aware of the
uh of the new variant on the 18th of
december which substantially changed
the uh position we acted uh decisively
in the way that
in the way that we did but uh there have
been people scientists who have called
for
uh no lockdown uh scientists who have
called
uh for uh uh for a complete lockdown
uh throughout uh they've been brutally
uh difficult
decisions and uh we have done our best
as i've
as i've said before to take in in to
safety all our decisions
in the interests of public health and
protecting
the public a mesa hall from the express
who i'm afraid i left out last night
mesa
[Music]
mesa you need to unmute
thank you i'm sorry about that can you
hear me yes uh
uh thank you very much prime minister um
sir patrick um
what is the latest scientific evidence
saying about the effects of vaccines on
people who've already had coronavirus
does it double up with the antibodies
and give you an extra layer of
protection
and what would your message be to anyone
who might think that i've had the virus
i don't need the jab and um prime
minister you talked today
in the commons about uh booster jabs in
the autumn
um does that mean we're going to see the
the infrastructure the mass vaccination
centers and so on
around for some time and given the
concern about uh new variants
is it possible that some code
restrictions may have to stay in force
until the over 50s have been given that
booster jab
do you want to go first yeah sure
if you've had coronavirus we know that
most people get antibodies and
and get some protection from it really
important to get the vaccine as well
i mean the vaccine will give another
boost on top of that
highly likely that you get a very good
immune response overall
in that situation and so um it's not a
reason
to avoid a vaccination i'd encourage
everybody to come forward for
vaccination
mesa we don't see any evidence at the
moment
to say that uh the virus the vaccines
don't have a beneficial effect against
uh all the variants so
uh it's likely
that all the vaccines have at least some
uh beneficial effect
on all variants but the way we're
thinking at the moment and you'll have
heard
jonathan van tan say this the other the
other night is that
as new variants appear it will be
more useful uh than ever to have
vaccines that can combat
all variants and yes i certainly think
we need to
be getting ready for a world in which we
do have
uh booster jabs uh against uh
new variants in the autumn but what we
what we want to do and and maybe
maybe beyond and we should start to
think about it as a as a
a flu jab uh something that that
elderly or vulnerable people and make
sure they have every year and and i've
no doubt that the vaccines will get
better and better at uh being able to
cover for all
uh for all variants but the the plan at
the moment is
is to continue to accelerate the rollout
of
uh the the present vaccines for for all
groups and
as i said just now we're aiming for all
uh jcvi
groups uh one to nine uh by the end of
april
okay uh thank you very much wait we've
got one last question from
nigel pretties from pharmaceutical
journey
thank you prime minister community
pharmacies have been a vital lifeline
for patients delivering medication
and remaining open to provide health
advice and support during the pandemic
and of course providing coverage
vaccinations
but they have yet to see their
additional costs during the pandemic
reimbursed and we're seeing hundreds of
high street branches close due to
financial problems exacerbated by covert
19.
when are you going to reimburse
pharmacies for their additional costs
during the pandemic
and how many pharmacies are you happy to
see close
before the government does anything
about it
well nigel i don't want to see any
pharmacy clothes i think pharmacies
provider
community pharmacies high street
pharmacies provide an
absolutely outstanding resource for our
country
and its and its healthcare needs and i'm
particularly grateful to pharmacies
now for what they're doing as part of
the vaccine effort
the hundreds of pharmacies up and down
the country are already
distributing vaccines very effectively
and we think that they can play a very
important role
in helping us to get vaccines into the
arms of
people who may be harder to to reach we
think pharmacies can play a really
really important role
people trust pharmacies they know where
they are they can find them
the the the uh people who work in the
staff are
uh are well informed helpful it's a it's
a very very good environment to get
uh a lot of good things done to protect
the public so
on your point about reimbursement i
would want to make sure that they're
reimbursed
uh as soon as possible they they play a
vital role
in helping us to to fight the pandemic
and many many
other public health needs anything you
want to add to that
patrick no well thank you all very much
see you next time thank you
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest
with bbc news